50 days into the war in Gaza our Focus
this week is the propaganda at play
Israel should have the upper hand but
doesn't and it shows the death toll
amongst journalists covering this story
is unprecedented 53 and
counted the UN special raur who has
issues with the way this conflict is
being
reported a temporary SE fire finally
came into effect this past week pausing
Israel's Onslaught on the Gaza Strip for
4 days while hostages taken by Hamas
were exchanged for Palestinian Prisoners
the information War however continues
and like the battlefield this fight is a
mismatch given the media tools that
Israel has at its disposal and the
largely uncritical treatment that it
gets from international news outlets and
yet Hamas has been more than holding its
own producing a different kind of
propaganda
often diminished or dismissed by Western
media but which resonates in the Arab
world and with more and more people in
the global South the Israeli government
clearly realizes that International
opinion is turning against it it has
tried to make this story all about the
horrors of October 7th rather than what
came before and what has happened since
because asymmetry aside Decades of
occupation and apartheid followed by a
war of Vengeance that has killed so so
many Palestinian civilians are proving
to be a tough
cell 48 days of Bloodshed later a truce
lasting 96 hours between Israel and
Hamas has come into effect giving gin
some room to breathe temporarily the
first pause in the fighting since
October 7th clearing the way for a
hostage Swap and the delivery of
humanitarian Aid into the Gaza Strip
in the information War however there is
no ceasefire in sight the Israeli
military has been cramming online spaces
full of spin claims of Hamas command
centers beneath hospitals this room is
an operational room that had
communication with electricity and a
copy of Hitler's mind comp supposedly
randomly found in some Palestinians home
Hamas has been producing its own
propaganda some of it looks like it's of
a video game featuring the Daredevil
tactics of its Fighters punctuated with
monologues from Hamas
[Music]
spokesman the two sides have produced a
barrage of competing claims purported
accomplishments on the battlefield and
ultimately narratives the battle for
public opinion in this conflict is
greater than normal
the amount of international engagement
here is disproportionate even to the
size of the conflict and both parties
are very keen on getting their message
across we know for example that Israel
has within its military a division whose
sole job it is to monitor social media
at the same time there's also a lot of
propaganda on the Palestinian side when
it comes to Hamas um its message is
defending itself for uh some of the
actions in October 7th but at the same
time legitimating its resistance to the
occupation and setic colonialism that
exist in Palestine and its message is
coming across in their world in
Palestinian Society very
powerfully Israel would never admit
defeat in an information War but its
actions suggest this one is not going
its way this past week at the UN Israeli
diplomats played a 47 minute long film
called bearing witness on the attacks on
October 7th the atrocities committed on
that day which included footage from
hamas's own cameras the video is more
than 6 weeks old but the Israeli
government knows that its
disproportionate inhumane bombing of
Gaza since has swung Global public
opinion against it that there is no way
to defend the killing of more than 5,000
Palestinian children so it's best to
roll back the BL rewind the tape and
make the story about October 7th and
Hamas it's important for Israel to
reiterate and demonstrate the brutality
of hamas's attack for several
reasons one of them is that there are
still a large number of people who don't
fully believe that Hamas deliberately
killed civilians on October 7th and by
displaying this footage it builds the
the legitimacy of the case but there is
another objective hamas's actions on
October 7th were different to its other
actions in the past this was something
more sadistic something more theatrical
in the way that the violence was
conducted and broadcast to the world and
broadcasting these videos showing them
to the world is part of building the
legitimacy of that argument when it was
first aired to uh journalists in Israel
people left the room and and they were
sick because it's incredibly graphic and
it's it's horrifying but despite the
fact that Israel has this ability and it
has all of this sophisticated social
media and propaganda it does look like
they're losing this war and it's the
reason why Israel is having to show oven
over the 47 minutes of uh horrific uh
documentary content the Israelis have
this problem that they're being
perceived um right
as engaging in brutal disproportionality
and killing large numbers of
civilians it is a war of
Vengeance and prime minister Netanyahu
has said this on several
occasions when admits that this is a war
of Vengeance he's giving the game away
another mistake in messaging much like
hamas's mistake of claiming they didn't
kill any
civilians prior to Friday's ceasefire
both Hamas and Israel were posting
combat videos when that content finds
its way onto international news outlets
the Israeli videos are usually treated
as information whereas hamas's content
due to its status as a terrorist
organization gets labeled as propaganda
these are Hamas propaganda videos from
the perspective of its Fighters One
Hamas voice you will rarely if ever hear
in Western media coverage is its
military spokesman Abu oeda an anonymous
presence with a reputation for defiance
through messaging that often includes a
call to Arms he has developed a huge
following among Arabic
speakers most of hamas's social media
output was on the messaging app Telegram
but its account there is now banned
still the videos it posts get shared by
its supporters and Affiliates on
Telegram and other platforms from there
it makes its way onto Arab News El clats
for the Arab world Hamas presents a a
hope for Liberation it's a national
movement it's legitimate there's a
willing ear to hear those who are doing
the fighting in the Arab world the other
important component of ABA that he's
generally covered with what we call inam
in Arabic the Palestinian uh scarf it
actually highlights the importance of
voice instead of the image of the face
itself it makes it a collective voice of
resistance he is a masked figure uh
almost a RW Shack test onto whom viewers
can project their own desires their own
expectations someone who in his
anonymity represents whatever you want
that movement to be Hamas is also
adapting like all organizations to the
Modern Age of digital journalism you
have a figure here who appears to be
charismatic to be dynamic energetic and
I think to a degree that explains why
people would prefer to listen to him
than a spokesman sitting in a suit at a
Podium who may have been around for 50
years with nothing to show for it Hamas
and its analy have been very very good
at combining the nationalism the Islamic
commitment and the Revolutionary ethos
and Charisma a lot of those speeches are
not really aimed at the West they're not
really aimed at the United States or or
Europe they're aimed at the Arabs and
the Muslims and they've been medium
effective they've had a certain flare
for those who identify with the concept
of
resistance Warfare does not get much
more asymmetrical than the kind Israel
is waging on Gaza a nuclear Nu Power
bankrolled by American Funding
pulverizing 2.3 million people locked in
an open air prison Israel is also far
better equipped to fight an information
War it has a military unit that
specializes in psychological warfare and
a formidable presence on social media
there are dozens of Israeli news outlets
compared to the one News Network Hamas
controls alud which broadcasts in Arabic
however the most persuasive case being
made on behalf of Palestinians in Gaza
is not coming from Hamas it is the
impact that gazen journalists have had
under the most dangerous conditions
imaginable exposing the horrors of
Israeli bombardment their work keeps
going viral traveling the world and it
is a primary reason why in the battle
for hearts and Minds Israel has been
taking a
beating the information war is far less
a symmetric than the military campaign
the scenes coming out of Gaza are
placing enormous pressure on Israel and
if you look at other parts of the world
particularly the global South South Asia
India China Latin America Global and
Regional television stations and
newspapers in those parts of the world
it is the Palestinian message that I
think is more widespread more compelling
to local audiences than the Israeli
message and I think that is a source of
real concern to the Israeli
government we are witnessing the rise of
an anti-war movement across the globe
new people are learning about the
Palestinian struggle the horrific
reality of Palestinians and how they Liv
I don't think for now Hamas is
interested in engaging with mainstream
Media or in spreading its messages in
the Western World the Arab world sees in
the palestini fighter a hero they see a
hope for the end of the occupation and
that's why it resonates
deeply this past week has been one of
the most devastating for journalists in
Gaza that in a war that's already been
described as the deadliest period on
record for the news media minak shiavi
is here with the details Richard the
toll on journalists during the war in
Gaza has been like nothing we've seen in
decades that is according to groups like
cpj the committee to protect journalists
and reporters Without Borders known as
rsf the cpj described October as the
deadliest month on record for
journalists since the organization began
tracking stats back in 1992 and that was
before at least 11 journalists were
killed in Gaza in the span of the past
10 days including belal jadala who ran a
media training and press Freedom
organization called press house
Palestine he was reportedly struck by
Tank fire as he attempted to flee the
Israeli ground Advance into Gaza City
this happened just a day after two other
journalists cameraman Huna selim and
reporter sari Mansour working for the
Hamas Affiliated News Network KS TV were
killed in an air strike numerous
journalists including Al jaz's own have
received direct threats from the Israeli
Army Israel has threatened Al jaz's
correspondent in Gaza yumna Alid telling
her and her family to leave their home
or risk being killed along the Israeli
Lebanese border where fight wrting has
persisted since the early days of the
conflict reporter Farah Omar and
cameraman rabi al-mamari for the
hasbalah Affiliated TV News Channel al-
mayadin were killed in an air strike
Israel said it was destroying Terror
cells along the border but both the
Lebanese government and almadin TV say
journalists are being deliberately
targeted the total number of media
professionals killed so far in this war
now stands at 53 46 Palestinians four
Israelis and three Lebanese the
ceasefire will have temporarily stop
these numbers Rising but it is only
scheduled to last for 4 days as rsf has
said journalism is being eradicated in
the Gaza Strip as a result of Israel's
refusal to heed calls to protect media
Personnel thanks Mina in recent weeks
there has been an alarmingly small
number of official voices calling for a
ceasefire in Gaza one exception has been
Francesca Alban an Italian trained in
international law she is the United
Nations special raor
on the occupied Palestinian territories
and she's been vocal in one interview
after another on the need for
journalists to remember the context in
this story and what international law
says about the rights and
responsibilities of the occupier and the
occupied long before October 7th Alban
was the target of smear campaigns and
calls for her dismissal from the UN not
one for being silenced she has gone in
the other direction chastising the UN
for its inaction
and Alban has implored the media to do
better telling journalists they have a
lot of homework to do the necessity of
reclaiming a more Humane narrative is
categorically imperative both to protect
Francesca Alban joins us now miss Alban
you've been on a media blitz ever since
October 7th you are no stranger to the
sensitivities around this story but tell
us about some of your interactions with
reporters and editors since that day the
assumptions that journalists have on
this story what's it been like for
you uh hi Richard uh it's uneven because
I have to say that there are there have
been a few journalists who have really
tried to do um good job good coverage
asking me sort of neutral questions to
appreciate the facts but mostly I've had
um a difficult experience with uh
mainstream media in the
west because I found
I found myself in the uncomfortable
position of being challenged on how I
would call things or how I would report
on things no it's not a Trope it's
really real so it seems not to
understand what I'm saying there is an
aparti regime no I'm serious there is an
apartheid regime it's domination this is
not a Trope this is international law I
mean it was not my intention to to
challenge journalists but it seems that
they really wanted to to to to challenge
my way of looking at things which I
found disturbing because again excuse me
but I'm I'm here to report on on things
that I've analyzed verified triangulated
and yeah I found it a bit surprising
that relates to something that you've
said about today's political landscape
you say it's marked by historical
Amnesia traditional media plays a
critical role in that and then many
people are living in an alternative
reality what do you mean exactly by that
yes yes Richard because this is not just
a conflict and calling calling it just a
conflict is a is a Mis Noma because this
is an occupation that has been ongoing
for 56 years so very limited uh
consideration for that but also very
limited consideration for the enduring
trauma that ALS also the Palestinians
have in themselves because um while
there is recognition for the the the
tragedy that the Jewish people have
lived through and through across
centuries that culminated in the horror
of the Holocaust there is very little
recognition of what the Palestinians has
had endured as a people since
1947 since the and and through the
creation of the state of Israel they
were never allowed to to a closure and
again this is not about Hamas this is
really the Palestinian as a people as
they try to resist a violent occupation
in the occupied pal Palestinian
territory there is no Hamas military
presence in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem and still over 200 people have
been killed by soldiers and armed the
settlers do you see any connection to it
in uh in mainstream media I don't think
that there is a fair objective any
impartial representation of the
relationship between the Israelis and
the Palestinians and the Palestinians
are the ones who are blamed and smeared
including when they try to protest in
Western Europe or to be in
solidarity with with the Palestinians in
the occupied Palestinian territory
Palestinians have heard the calls as we
have from Israeli officials and voices
in the Israeli media for what amounts to
ethnic cleansing of Gaza as a lawyer are
you surprised by the evidence that they
are willingly providing of what appears
to be the intent to commit what are in
fact war crimes there seems to be this
sense of impunity over their words it's
surprising yes because the Israelis have
never been so explicit in admitting
responsibility for specific incidents
one of the things that were absolutely
shocking was the the bombing of the
jabalia refugee camp because the Israeli
Army knew that there were about 400
civilians Palestinian civilians in
including hostages and nonetheless the
camp was bombed heavily and hundreds of
Palestinians were killed hundreds were
injured and the number of hostages was
reportedly killed in that case so yeah
they've been quite outspoken about their
intention including calling for the
Erasure of Gaza the flattening of
Gaza the same time what I found more
surprising is the kind of denial and
this is the what I call the alternative
reality that people living in the west
there are almost 15,000 who have been
reportedly killed and and and in
politicians in the west are still
debating whether a a permanent ceas fire
should take place or not so yeah this I
find very surprising we have seen before
what happens to people
when this this Fury becomes becomes
popular and this genocidal call that we
have heard from politicians and and
military leaders in Israel is also
Amplified in various groups in Israeli
Society so in the face of this
madness as someone who has
seen genocidal horror happening in other
parts of the world I say it's clear that
this has this has is taking the Israeli
Society to a very dark place and this is
why I say in the interest of the
palestin both Palestinians and the
Israelis This Must Be Stopped you've
faced a lot of
criticism um for some of the things that
you've said and you faced some of that
criticism prior to October 7th some
cases you've been defamed pressure
groups have been
on your case to resign what kind of
things are they saying about you are
they succeeding Miss Alban in making
your job more difficult look these
groups and they I mean they're all
connected one way or another because
they say exactly the same things that
are repeated exactly in the same way
some sometimes sometimes in the same
sequence over and over and the
accusations against me are that I'm an
anti-semite that I am Pro Hamas and I
support terrorism Franchesca Alban is
someone who pretends to be neutral uh
neither her position nor her own
background have anything to do with
impartiality I mean these are false
allegation that gives enough uh to me to
take J legal action and it has also
happened to my predecessors is it
succeeding I don't think so because
eventually more and more people keep on
asking me to to speak and to speak out
wherever I go uh speaking to governments
or speaking to the media of record
people know people tell me or let me
understand that the situation is better
known that it would seem in the public
debate but there is a lot of censorship
and self-censorship because people don't
want to be confronted with the
allegations I I have to face on a daily
basis which in my case don't distract me
I keep focused on what I have to do but
I think that it's necessary to tackle
this issue at the global level because
it's uh it's now also the weaponization
of anti-Semitism and the level of smear
against anyone who utters a word of
criticism against Israel and everyone
who UTS a word of solidarity with the
Palestinians face such a huge and evil
uh um campaign I mean I also spoke with
you know human rights defenders in the
Pacific Islands where they say well you
we Face even arrest and detention if we
come out and protest in solidarity with
the Palestinian people against what's
happening in the Gaza Strip so there is
a crashing of freedom of assembly a
crashing of freedom of expression and of
the right to protest that it's
absolutely unprecedented at this global
level and of this scale Franchesca
albanesa un special raor for the
occupied Palestinian territories you're
up against it uh we understand you're
very busy we're very grateful for the
time that you've made for us today thank
you
Richard you've been watching yet another
full edition of the listening post on
the war on Gaza our seventh straight in
17 years of doing this program
monitoring the global media we have
never devoted so much coverage to a
single story we make no apologies for
that given the awful attacks of October
7th the war crimes that have taken place
since and that will presumably resume
once this temporary ceasefire ends we
will continue to provide wall-to-wall
coverage of this story as we would for
any case of genocide unfolding before us
we'll see you next time here at the
listening
post